Introduction. Task and Model. Visualization of Attention and Gating. Attention. LSTM Gating Signals. Conclusion. Deep learning has achieved tremendous success for many NLP tasks. However, unlike traditional methods that provide optimized weights for human understandable features, the behavior of deep learning models is much harder to interpret. Due to the high dimensionality of word embeddings, and the complex, typically recurrent architectures used for textual data, it is often unclear how and why a deep learning model reaches its decisions.. There are a few attempts toward explaininginterpreting deep learning-based models, mostly by visualizing the representation of words andor hidden states, and their importances (via saliency or erasure) on shallow tasks like sentiment analysis and POS tagging BIBREF0, BIBREF1, BIBREF2, BIBREF3. In contrast, we focus on interpreting the gating and attention signals of the intermediate layers of deep models in the challenging task of Natural Language Inference. A key concept in explaining deep models is saliency, which determines what is critical for the final decision of a deep model. So far, saliency has only been used to illustrate the impact of word embeddings. In this paper, we extend this concept to the intermediate layer of deep models to examine the saliency of attention as well as the LSTM gating signals to understand the behavior of these components and their impact on the final decision.. We make two main contributions. First, we introduce new strategies for interpreting the behavior of deep models in their intermediate layers, specifically, by examining the saliency of the attention and the gating signals. Second, we provide an extensive analysis of the state-of-the-art model for the NLI task and show that our methods reveal interesting insights not available from traditional methods of inspecting attention and word saliency.. In this paper, our focus was on NLI, which is a fundamental NLP task that requires both understanding and reasoning. Furthermore, the state-of-the-art NLI models employ complex neural architectures involving key mechanisms, such as attention and repeated reading, widely seen in successful models for other NLP tasks. As such, we expect our methods to be potentially useful for other natural understanding tasks as well.. In NLI BIBREF4, we are given two sentences, a premise and a hypothesis, the goal is to decide the logical relationship (Entailment, Neutral, or Contradiction) between them.. Many of the top performing NLI models BIBREF5, BIBREF6, BIBREF7, BIBREF8, BIBREF9, BIBREF10, BIBREF11, are variants of the ESIM model BIBREF11, which we choose to analyze in this paper. ESIM reads the sentences independently using LSTM at first, and then applies attention to aligncontrast the sentences. Another round of LSTM reading then produces the final representations, which are compared to make the prediction. Detailed description of ESIM can be found in the Appendix.. Using the SNLI BIBREF4 data, we train two variants of ESIM, with dimensionality 50 and 300 respectively, referred to as ESIM-50 and ESIM-300 in the remainder of the paper.. In this work, we are primarily interested in the internal workings of the NLI model. In particular, we focus on the attention and the gating signals of LSTM readers, and how they contribute to the decisions of the model.. Attention has been widely used in many NLP tasks BIBREF12, BIBREF13, BIBREF14 and is probably one of the most critical parts that affects the inference decisions. Several pieces of prior work in NLI have attempted to visualize the attention layer to provide some understanding of their models BIBREF5, BIBREF15. Such visualizations generate a heatmap representing the similarity between the hidden states of the premise and the hypothesis (Eq. 19 of Appendix). Unfortunately the similarities are often the same regardless of the decision.. Let us consider the following example, where the same premise A kid is playing in the garden, is paired with three different hypotheses:. A kid is taking a nap in the garden. A kid is having fun in the garden with her family. A kid is having fun in the garden. Note that the ground truth relationships are Contradiction, Neutral, and Entailment, respectively.. The first row of Fig. 1 shows the visualization of normalized attention for the three cases produced by ESIM-50, which makes correct predictions for all of them. As we can see from the figure, the three attention maps are fairly similar despite the completely different decisions. The key issue is that the attention visualization only allows us to see how the model aligns the premise with the hypothesis, but does not show how such alignment impacts the decision. This prompts us to consider the saliency of attention.. The concept of saliency was first introduced in vision for visualizing the spatial support on an image for a particular object class BIBREF16. In NLP, saliency has been used to study the importance of words toward a final decision BIBREF0.. We propose to examine the saliency of attention. Specifically, given a premise-hypothesis pair and the models decision, we consider the similarity between a pair of premise and hypothesis hidden states as a variable. The score of the decision is thus a function of for all and. The saliency of is then defined to be.. The second row of Fig. 1 presents the attention saliency map for the three examples acquired by the same ESIM-50 model. Interestingly, the saliencies are clearly different across the examples, each highlighting different parts of the alignment. Specifically, for h1, we see the alignment between is playing and taking a nap and the alignment of in a garden to have the most prominent saliency toward the decision of Contradiction. For h2, the alignment of kid and her family seems to be the most salient for the decision of Neutral. Finally, for h3, the alignment between is having fun and kid is playing have the strongest impact toward the decision of Entailment.. From this example, we can see that by inspecting the attention saliency, we effectively pinpoint which part of the alignments contribute most critically to the final prediction whereas simply visualizing the attention itself reveals little information.. In the previous examples, we study the behavior of the same model on different inputs. Now we use the attention saliency to compare the two different ESIM models: ESIM-50 and ESIM-300.. Consider two examples with a shared hypothesis of A man ordered a book and premise:. John ordered a book from amazon. Mary ordered a book from amazon. Here ESIM-50 fails to capture the gender connections of the two different names and predicts Neutral for both inputs, whereas ESIM-300 correctly predicts Entailment for the first case and Contradiction for the second.. In the first two columns of Fig. 2 (column a and b) we visualize the attention of the two examples for ESIM-50 (left) and ESIM-300 (right) respectively. Although the two models make different predictions, their attention maps appear qualitatively similar.. In contrast, columns 3-4 of Fig. 2 (column c and d) present the attention saliency for the two examples by ESIM-50 and ESIM-300 respectively. We see that for both examples, ESIM-50 primarily focused on the alignment of ordered, whereas ESIM-300 focused more on the alignment of John and Mary with man. It is interesting to note that ESIM-300 does not appear to learn significantly different similarity values compared to ESIM-50 for the two critical pairs of words (John, man) and (Mary, man) based on the attention map. The saliency map, however, reveals that the two models use these values quite differently, with only ESIM-300 correctly focusing on them.. LSTM gating signals determine the flow of information. In other words, they indicate how LSTM reads the word sequences and how the information from different parts is captured and combined. LSTM gating signals are rarely analyzed, possibly due to their high dimensionality and complexity. In this work, we consider both the gating signals and their saliency, which is computed as the partial derivative of the score of the final decision with respect to each gating signal.. Instead of considering individual dimensions of the gating signals, we aggregate them to consider their norm, both for the signal and for its saliency. Note that ESIM models have two LSTM layers, the first (input) LSTM performs the input encoding and the second (inference) LSTM generates the representation for inference.. In Fig. 3 we plot the normalized signal and saliency norms for different gates (input, forget, output) of the Forward input (bottom three rows) and inference (top three rows) LSTMs. These results are produced by the ESIM-50 model for the three examples of Section 3.1, one for each column.. From the figure, we first note that the saliency tends to be somewhat consistent across different gates within the same LSTM, suggesting that we can interpret them jointly to identify parts of the sentence important for the models prediction.. Comparing across examples, we see that the saliency curves show pronounced differences across the examples. For instance, the saliency pattern of the Neutral example is significantly different from the other two examples, and heavily concentrated toward the end of the sentence (with her family). Note that without this part of the sentence, the relationship would have been Entailment. The focus (evidenced by its strong saliency and strong gating signal) on this particular part, which presents information not available from the premise, explains the models decision of Neutral.. Comparing the behavior of the input LSTM and the inference LSTM, we observe interesting shifts of focus. In particular, we see that the inference LSTM tends to see much more concentrated saliency over key parts of the sentence, whereas the input LSTM sees more spread of saliency. For example, for the Contradiction example, the input LSTM sees high saliency for both taking and in, whereas the inference LSTM primarily focuses on nap, which is the key word suggesting a Contradiction. Note that ESIM uses attention between the input and inference LSTM layers to aligncontrast the sentences, hence it makes sense that the inference LSTM is more focused on the critical differences between the sentences. This is also observed for the Neutral example as well.. It is worth noting that, while revealing similar general trends, the backward LSTM can sometimes focus on different parts of the sentence (e.g., see Fig. 11 of Appendix), suggesting the forward and backward readings provide complementary understanding of the sentence.. We propose new visualization and interpretation strategies for neural models to understand how and why they work. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed strategies on a complex task (NLI). Our strategies are able to provide interesting insights not achievable by previous explanation techniques. Our future work will extend our study to consider other NLP tasks and models with the goal of producing useful insights for further improving these models. Model In this section we describe the ESIM model. We divide ESIM to three main parts: 1) input encoding, 2) attention, and 3) inference. Figure 4 demonstrates a high-level view of the ESIM framework. Let and be the given premise with length and hypothesis with length respectively, where are word embeddings of -dimensional vector. The goal is to predict a label that indicates the logical relationship between premise and hypothesis. Below we briefly explain the aforementioned parts. Input Encoding It utilizes a bidirectional LSTM (BiLSTM) for encoding the given premise and hypothesis using Equations 16 and 17 respectively.. hatu in mathbb Rn times 2d (Eq. ). hatv in mathbb Rm times 2d (Eq. ) where and 0 are the reading sequences of 1 and 2 respectively. Attention It employs a soft alignment method to associate the relevant sub-components between the given premise and hypothesis. Equation 19 (energy function) computes the unnormalized attention weights as the similarity of hidden states of the premise and hypothesis.. u (Eq. ) where 3 and 4 are the hidden representations of 5 and 6 respectively which are computed earlier in Equations 16 and 17. Next, for each word in either premise or hypothesis, the relevant semantics in the other sentence is extracted and composed according to 7. Equations 20 and 21 provide formal and specific details of this procedure.. tildev_j (Eq. ). hatu (Eq. ) where 8 represents the extracted relevant information of 9 by attending to 0 while 1 represents the extracted relevant information of 2 by attending to 3. Next, it passes the enriched information through a projector layer which produce the final output of attention stage. Equations 22 and 23 formally represent this process.. p (Eq. ). q (Eq. ) Here 4 stands for element-wise product while 5 and 6 are the trainable weights and biases of the projector layer respectively. 7 and 8 indicate the output of attention devision for premise and hypothesis respectively. Inference During this phase, it uses another BiLSTM to aggregate the two sequences of computed matching vectors, 9 and 0 from the attention stage (Equations 27 and 28 ).. emph softmax (Eq. ). hatu textit BiLSTM(u) (Eq. 16) where 1 and 2 are the reading sequences of 3 and 4 respectively. Finally the concatenation max and average pooling of 5 and 6 are pass through a multilayer perceptron (MLP) classifier that includes a hidden layer with 7 activation and 8 output layer. The model is trained in an end-to-end manner. Attention Study Here we provide more examples on the NLI task which intend to examine specific behavior in this model. Such examples indicate interesting observation that we can analyze them in the future works. Table 1 shows the list of all example. LSTM Gating Signal Finally, Figure 11 depicts the backward LSTM gating signals study.